---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: "Heap(Unfinished)"
description: "Some Notes for heap"
categories: [data_structure]
tags: [c++, heap, tree]
redirect_from:
  - /2018/04/13/
---

* Kramdown table of contents
{:toc .toc}

---

# Heap

## Abstract

Heap is a tree-based data structure that satisfies the property: every parent node must be either greater than or equal to(max heap) or less than or equal to(min heap) its children. 
Heap has not to be sorted. 
There is no particular relationship among nodes on any given level or among the siblings, but between every parent and its children.
Usually, if people discuss a heap, it points to a binary heap.

---

# Binary Heap

## Abstract

When a heap is a complete binary tree[^1], it is called a binary heap. Binary heap has a smallest possible height: a heap with $N$ nodes and $a$ branches will always has $\lfloor log_aN \rfloor$ height(the height of bottommost level is **0**). 
For example, a binary heap with $10$ nodes and $2$ branches, its height would be $\lfloor log_210 \rfloor$, which is $\lfloor 3.322 \rfloor$, so the height is $3$.

## Complexity

Here are some complexities in binary heap:

|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Algorithms | Average | Worst case
| space | O(n) | O(n)
| build | O(n) | O(n)
| insert | O(1) | O(log n)
| delete | O(log n) | O(log n)
| search | O(n) | O(n)
| peek[^2] | O(1) | O(1) 


## Insert

Insertion Steps:

1. Put the new item to the tail
2. Bubble up(compare with another sibling and parent) from the new item to maintain the heap property

The worst case of insertion is obvious. The height of a heap is $\lfloor logN \rfloor$. In the worst case, the new item is the biggest number and needs to bubble up to the root. In other words, the new item swaps $\lfloor logN \rfloor$ times to replace the root. Therefore, the worst complexity is O($logN$).

However, the average complexity is more complicated but interesting. Our goal is to obtain the expected value of the swap times of a new item. We know most of the nodes sink to the bottom and the difference of the number of nodes at each level is about two times. If we have $n$ nodes with $h$ height, we can assume that, for the new inserted item, the possibility of staying at $h=0$ is $\dfrac{1}{2}$, at $h=1$ is $\dfrac{1}{4}$, ..., and at $h=h$ is $\dfrac{1}{n}$. Apparently, there is no swap happened if the new item stays at leaves($h=0$), which means that the $\dfrac{1}{2}$ possibility happened. Again, the new item swaps $1$ time to reach $h=1$, $2$ times to reach $h=2$, and so on.

For a binary heap with $h$ height, the expected value of the swap times $E$ is:

$$
E = 1(\dfrac{1}{4}) + 2(\dfrac{1}{8}) + 3(\dfrac{1}{16}) + 4(\dfrac{1}{32}) + ... + (h-1)(\dfrac{1}{2^{h}}) + h(\dfrac{1}{2^{h+1}})
$$

We can divide both sides by 2:

$$
\dfrac{1}{2}E = 1(\dfrac{1}{8}) + 2(\dfrac{1}{16}) + 3(\dfrac{1}{32}) + ... + (h-1)(\dfrac{1}{2^{h+1}}) + h(\dfrac{1}{2^{h+2}})
$$

Let the former minus the latter:

$$
E - \dfrac{1}{2}E = 1(\dfrac{1}{4}) + 1(\dfrac{1}{8}) + 1(\dfrac{1}{16}) + 1(\dfrac{1}{32}) + ... + 1(\dfrac{1}{2^{h+1}}) - h(\dfrac{1}{2^{h+2}})
$$

Multiply both sides by 2 to get back the $E$:

$$
E = \dfrac{1}{2} + \dfrac{1}{4} + \dfrac{1}{8} + \dfrac{1}{16} + ... + \dfrac{1}{2^{h}} - h(\dfrac{1}{2^{h+1}})
$$

We can apply the geometric series formula at this point:

$$
a_1 = \dfrac{1}{2}, r = \dfrac{1}{2}, a_h = \dfrac{1}{2}(\dfrac{1}{2})^{h-1} = \dfrac{1}{2^{h}}
$$

$$
S_h = \dfrac{\dfrac{1}{2}(1 - \dfrac{1}{2^h})}{1 - \dfrac{1}{2}} = 1 - \dfrac{1}{2^h}
$$

Apply the geometric seris to $E$:

$$
E = 1 - \dfrac{1}{2^h} - h(\dfrac{1}{2^{h+1}})
$$

We can simplify both sides:

$$
E = 1 - (\dfrac{1}{2^h})(1 + \dfrac{h}{2})
$$

When the $h$ is great enough, or just assuming it approaches infinity:

$$
E = 1 - (0)(1 + \dfrac{h}{2}) = 1
$$

As a result, we can say the average time for a new item to swap is O(1).


[^1]: A binary tree that is fully stuffed except the bottom level, and all nodes at the bottom level should be as far left as possible.

[^2]: Peek is an operation on certain data types, particular to some sequential structures such as stack, queue, heap, which can get the top(front) value of structures without removing the element. This operation gets the same value as "pop()" or "top()".
